THE GANGES IS THE MOST
VENERATED RIVER ON EARTH.
ON ITS 2,500 KILOMETER JOURNEY
FROM SOURCE TO SEA IT FLOWS
THROUGH THE PHYSICAL AND
SPIRITUAL HEART OF INDIA.
TO BATHE IN THESE WATERS
IS SAID TO PURIFY THE SOUL.
TO DIE ON THE RIVERBANK IS
TO GAIN ENTRY TO HEAVEN.
THE GANGES'
SPIRITUAL INFLUENCE
IS MATCHED BY ITS
PHYSICAL POWER.
THE RIVER AND ITS TRIBUTARIES
SUPPORT HALF A BILLION PEOPLE.
BUT TODAY A CRISIS IS
LOOMING WHICH THREATENS
TO TURN THIS RIVER OF LIFE
INTO A RIVER OF DEATH.
AS INDIA'S POPULATION KEEPS
GROWING, THE POLLUTION CREATED
BY ITS PEOPLE IS DEFILING THE
WATERS WHICH THEY WORSHIP.
EACH YEAR OVER A
MILLION YOUNG CHILDREN
ARE POISONED
BY THIS RIVER.
TODAY THE GANGES, THOUGH
HOLY, IS LESS THAN PURE.
NO RIVER ON EARTH HAS AS MUCH
INFLUENCE OVER ITS PEOPLE
AS THE GANGES.
TO MILLIONS OF INDIANS THIS
RIVER IS A PHYSICAL LIFELINE
PROVIDING THEIR ONLY
SOURCE OF FRESH WATER.
TO HINDU BELIEVERS
THE GANGES IS ALSO THE
EARTHLY FORM OF
THE GODDESS GANGA.
ITS WATERS ARE SAID TO
BE SO POWERFUL THAT
JUST A DROP CAN
CLEANSE THE BODY OF SIN.
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS THIS
RIVER HAS BEEN THE BEDROCK
OF INDIAN CULTURE
AND BELIEF.
TO THE PEOPLE
SHE IS THE MOTHER
WHO GRANTS THEM
ETERNAL SALVATION.
BUT IN RECENT TIMES
THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY
OF THIS WATER HAS
BEEN THREATENED.
WHILE THE HIMALAYAN GLACIERS
WHICH FEED THE RIVER
ARE RETREATING, THE
AMOUNT OF POLLUTION
ENTERING THE WATERS
IS RISING DAY BY DAY.
WITHIN A GENERATION THE
GANGES MIGHT NOT ONLY BE
TOO POLLUTED TO USE,
IT MIGHT CEASE TO EXIST.
TODAY THE PEOPLE OF INDIA ARE
FACING THE GREATEST CHALLENGE
IN THE HISTORY OF THE GANGES:
HOW TO PURIFY A RIVER
WHICH TO THEM IS THE
EMBODIMENT OF PURITY ITSELF.
IN HINDU CULTURE ORDINARY
WATER IS BELIEVED TO HAVE
EXTRAORDINARY POWERS.
MILLIONS OF INDIANS FOLLOW
A DAILY RITUAL OF POURING
A HANDFUL OVER THEMSELVES
TO REMOVE THE IMPURITIES
WHICH ACCUMULATE IN
THE COURSE OF THE DAY.
WHEN WATER IS MOVING IN A
RIVER, IT'S EVEN MORE PRECIOUS
SINCE IT CARRIES ANY
POLLUTION AWAY IN ITS FLOW.
ALL OF INDIA'S MAJOR RIVERS
ARE CONSIDERED TO BE HOLY,
BUT THE RIVER GANGES
IS THE HOLIEST OF ALL.
FROM ITS SOURCE IN THE HIMALAYAS
TO ITS DELTA IN BENGAL
THE GANGES CREATES A
RIVER BASIN THAT SUPPORTS
ONE-TENTH OF THE
WORLD'S POPULATION.
BUT ACCORDING TO
ANCIENT HINDU SCRIPTURES
THE RIVER GANGES
ORIGINALLY FLOWED IN HEAVEN.
LONG AGO SHE AGREED TO FALL
TO EARTH TO HELP HUMANKIND
BY CLEANSING AND RESURRECTING
THE ASHES OF THE DEAD.
TO SAVE THE WORLD FROM THE
IMPACT OF THE RIVER'S DESCENT,
THE HINDU GOD LORD SHIVA
CAUGHT THE GANGES IN HIS HAIR.
TODAY A WHOLE CULTURE OF WORSHIP
HAS SPRUNG UP AROUND THE PLACE
WHERE THIS MYSTICAL EVENT
IS SAID TO HAVE HAPPENED.
SITUATED AT THE FOOT OF
THE HIMALAYAS, GANGOTRI
IS THE FIRST TOWN THROUGH
WHICH THE GANGES FLOWS
ON ITS COURSE FROM
MOUNTAIN TO SEA.
THIS ALSO MARKS THE PLACE
WHERE THE RIVER GANGES
IS SAID TO HAVE FALLEN
FROM HEAVEN TO EARTH.
IN WINTER GANGOTRI IS
SNOWBOUND AND DESOLATE
BUT AS SOON AS THE ICE
MELTS AND THE ROADS OPEN
THE PLACE COMES ALIVE WITH
THOUSANDS OF PILGRIMS.
VISITING THE GANGES AT
GANGOTRI IS ONE OF THE MOST
POWERFUL PILGRIMAGES
A HINDU CAN MAKE.
AT AN ALTITUDE OF
OVER 3,000 METERS,
REACHING GANGOTRI
IS NO SMALL TASK.
MOST PILGRIMS ARRIVE BY BUS,
ENDURING A JOURNEY OF DAYS ON
OVERCROWDED COACHES ALONG
TREACHEROUS MOUNTAIN ROADS.
WHEN THEY EVENTUALLY SET FOOT
ON SOLID GROUND, FOREMOST IN
THEIR MIND IS REACHING THE RIVER
WHICH THEY CALL MOTHER GANGA.
ONCE AT THE WATERS' EDGE
THEY FULFILL THEIR PILGRIMAGE
BY BATHING IN THE
ICE COLD FLOW.
JUST AS GODDESS GANGA CAME TO
CLEANSE THE ASHES OF HUMANKIND,
THESE PILGRIMS BELIEVE THAT THE
RIVER WILL REMOVE THEIR SINS.
HERE, WHERE THE RIVER RUNS FAST
AND PURE, ITS CLEANSING POWERS
ARE THOUGHT TO BE
PARTICULARLY STRONG.
TO THANK THE RIVER FOR PURIFYING
THEM THE PILGRIMS MAY OFFER
PRAYERS AT THE TEMPLE; BUILT, SO
IT IS SAID, OVER THE EXACT ROCK
UPON WHICH LORD SHIVA SAT TO
RECEIVE THE GANGES IN HIS HAIR.
SOME PILGRIMS EMPLOY
PRIESTS TO CONDUCT
PRIVATE CEREMONIES
OF DEVOTION.
FOR A FEW RUPEES' PAYMENT THEY
MAKE OFFERINGS TO MOTHER GANGA
ON THE PILGRIM'S BEHALF.
THE EFFORT OF REACHING GANGOTRI
MEANS THAT ONLY DEVOUT PILGRIMS
ARE PREPARED TO ENDURE THE
LONG COACH JOURNEY TO GET HERE.
BUT THE MOST DEVOUT OF
ALL DO NOT TRAVEL BY BUS.
THEY CHOOSE TO WALK
EVERY STEP OF THE WAY.
TRANSLATOR: I HAVE
COME FROM BENARES.
IT'S VERY FAR. IT'S
1,000 KILOMETERS AWAY.
I WALKED ALL THE WAY. IT
TOOK ME THREE MONTHS.
I DIDN'T HAVE ANY MONEY AND BY
BEGGING FOR FOOD AND DRINK
I MANAGED TO
COME HERE.
>>NANI NEFH IS A SADHU,
LITERALLY MEANING "GOOD MAN".
HE IS ONE OF SOME FOUR
MILLION SADHUS IN INDIA
WHO TURN THEIR BACK
ON THE REAL WORLD
AND DEDICATE THEIR LIVES TO
THE CONTEMPLATION OF GOD.
FOR THESE MEN, PILGRIMAGE IS A
WAY OF LIFE AND ENDURING THE
HARDSHIP OF WALKING TO GANGOTRI
IS A SIGN OF THEIR DEVOTION.
LIVING ON CHARITY AND DONATIONS,
SOME SADHUS WEAR ORANGE
CLOTHING TO SYMBOLIZE THEIR
REJECTION OF MATERIAL THINGS.
SOME, LIKE NANI, COVER
THEMSELVES IN ASH
AS A SIGN OF
AUSTERITY.
FOR SADHUS, COMING TO GANGOTRI
IS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THEIR
LIFELONG QUEST TO WORSHIP
THE DEITIES, AMONG WHOM
GODDESS GANGA IS ONE
OF THE MOST POWERFUL.
TRANSLATOR: EVERY
MORNING I GET UP, BATHE,
PERFORM MY RITUALS
AND APPLY ASH.
I PERFORM PRAYERS TO THE MOTHER
GANGA AND FOR THE PEOPLE.
THEN HAVING HAD
MY MEAL AND WATER
AND AFTER THE EVENING
PRAYER I HAVE TO SLEEP.
THE NEXT MORNING I WAKE
UP AT 4:00 AND BATHE AGAIN.
THIS IS HOW ONE HAS
TO LIVE IN GANGOTRI.
>>BUT FOR THE MOST
DEVOUT PILGRIMS
GANGOTRI IS NOT THE
END OF THE JOURNEY.
MANY CONTINUE WALKING 17
KILOMETERS BEYOND THE TOWN,
ACROSS THE GANGOTRI GLACIER
TO THE ICE CAVE AT GAMOOK.
LITERALLY MEANING "COW'S
MOUTH", THIS ICE CAVE CONTAINS
THE MILKY GLACIAL SPRING
WHICH FEEDS THE GANGES.
AS THE SPIRITUAL SOURCE OF
THE RIVER, HINDUS BELIEVE
THAT THE WATERS' CLEANSING
POWERS HERE ARE SUBLIME.
BUT THE EXACT LOCATION
OF THIS SPRING HAS SHIFTED
OVER THE COURSE OF
TIME AS THE ICE FIELDS
WHICH FEED THE RIVER
HAVE RETREATED.
ONE MAN WHO'S WATCHED THIS
ALARMING TRANSFORMATION
TAKE PLACE IS
SWAMI SANDARAM.
HE NOW LIVES IN GANGOTRI
BUT FIRST VISITED THE TOWN
AS A YOUNG PILGRIM.
TRANSLATOR: I FIRST
CAME TO GANGOTRI IN 1948.
GANGOTRI IS
AT 10,300 FEET.
THE FLOWERS THAT WERE
HERE AT THAT TIME, THE DEER,
THE BROWN BEAR, THE WHITE
BEAR, THEY DISAPPEARED.
AT THAT TIME THERE
WERE ONLY FOUR HOUSES.
NOW AN ENTIRE TOWN
HAS SETTLED HERE.
>>THE HOUSE WHICH SWAMI
SANDARAM BUILT FOR HIMSELF
IS A TESTAMENT TO HIS LIFELONG
PASSION FOR PHOTOGRAPHY.
WHEN HE TRAVELED ON
FROM GANGOTRI TO GAMOOK,
HE TOOK HIS
CAMERA WITH HIM.
TRANSLATOR:
FROM RIGHT TO LEFT,
THIS IS A PANORAMA
OF EIGHT PHOTOGRAPHS.
BEHIND THE SHIVLING PEAK
IS THE MERU GLACIER.
IT MEETS THE GANGOTRI
GLACIER OVER HERE.
NOW THE GANGOTRI
GLACIER AT GAMOOK
HAS RECEDED BY
THREE KILOMETERS.
ITS THICKNESS HAS BEEN
REDUCED BY ONE KILOMETER.
>>SWAMI'S PHOTOGRAPHS
DOCUMENT THE DISTURBING CHANGES
WHICH ARE HAPPENING ON
THE HIMALAYAN ICE FIELDS.
EACH YEAR THE GANGOTRI
GLACIER SHRINKS BY 25 METERS.
THIS WOULD EXPLAIN THE APPARENT
CONFUSION IN RELIGIOUS ACCOUNTS
OF WHERE THE
GANGES BEGINS.
FOR THOUGH THE GLACIAL SPRING
WHICH FEEDS THE RIVER RISES
TODAY AT GAMOOK, 4,000 YEARS
AGO WHEN THE HINDU SCRIPTURES
WERE WRITTEN THE GLACIER
WOULD HAVE EXTENDED
ALL THE WAY TO GANGOTRI,
GIVING RISE TO THE LEGEND
THAT IS WAS HERE THE
GANGES FELL TO EARTH.
THE GLACIER IS SHRINKING
FOR TWO REASONS.
IT'S CLEAR GLOBAL
WARMING HAS A PART TO PLAY
BUT THE PILGRIMS THEMSELVES
ARE ALSO RESPONSIBLE.
TO FEED GANGOTRI'S RELIGIOUS
TOURISM INDUSTRY, THOUSANDS
OF TREES ARE BEING CUT
DOWN FOR FUEL AND BUILDING,
CAUSING EROSION AND
WEAKENING THE GLACIAL WALLS.
TRANSLATOR: DUE TO HOT WEATHER,
DEFORESTATION AND FIRES
AND MODERN DEVELOPMENT,
THE WILDLIFE HAS BEEN KILLED
AND THE GANGOTRI GLACIER IS
RECEDING FURTHER AND FURTHER.
IN THE NEXT 50 YEARS THE
ETERNAL GLACIER WILL DISAPPEAR.
INDIA AND THE WHOLE WORLD
WILL PINE FOR JUST A DROP
OF GANGES WATER.
>>EXPERTS WARN THAT AT THIS
RATE THE GLACIER WILL DISAPPEAR
BY 2035 AND THE SPIRITUAL
SOURCE OF THE GANGES
WILL DRY UP COMPLETELY.
THE EFFECTS OF SUCH AN
EVENT WOULD BE CATASTROPHIC
FOR ALL THOSE WHO
DEPEND ON THESE WATERS
TO SUSTAIN BOTH THEIR
BODY AND THEIR SOUL.
FROM GANGOTRI THE GANGES
PLUNGES DOWNSTREAM
THROUGH THE RUGGED
MOUNTAINS OF NORTHERN INDIA,
BRINGING LIFE
TO THE LAND.
IN THESE POOR AND REMOTE
REGIONS, THE RIVER PROVIDES
THE ONLY SOURCE
OF FRESH WATER.
IN A COUNTRY WHICH SUFFERS
SEVERE WATER SHORTAGES,
THIS IS THE GREATEST GIFT
THE GANGES CAN BESTOW.
LATER ALONG ITS COURSE THE RIVER
SUSTAINS MANY MORE PEOPLE AS ITS
WATERS ARE DIVERTED AND PUMPED
TO THIRSTY CITIES AND TOWNS.
TODAY THE GANGES AND
ITS TRIBUTARIES SUPPORT
HALF THE POPULATION
OF INDIA.
AS WELL AS QUENCHING PEOPLE'S
THIRST, THE RIVER SUSTAINS
THEIR LIVESTOCK AND
FERTILIZES THEIR LAND.
THE REASON FOR THIS IS THAT
THE GANGES CARRIES MORE SILT
THAN ANY OTHER
RIVER IN THE WORLD.
MINERAL-RICH SEDIMENT ERODED
FROM THE HIMALAYAN ROCKS
IS CARRIED ALONG IN THE
FLOW AND DEPOSITED ACROSS
THE RIVER VALLEYS, CREATING
RICH AGRICULTURAL SOILS.
IT'S NO WONDER THAT THE
GIFTS WHICH THE RIVER BRINGS
ARE SEEN AS BLESSINGS
FROM THE GODDESS.
SOME 225 KILOMETERS
DOWNSTREAM OF GANGOTRI
IS THE TOWN
OF HARIDWAR.
HARIDWAR IS REVERED AS THE
PLACE WHERE THE GANGES
LEAVES THE MOUNTAINS
AND ENTERS THE PLAINS,
BECOMING THE FORCE
WHICH FERTILIZES THE LAND.
EACH YEAR, 18 MILLION PEOPLE
VISIT THE TOWN TO CELEBRATE
THIS CRUCIAL JUNCTION
IN THE RIVER'S STORY.
THE STEEP RIVER SLOPES ARE LINED
WITH SPECIALLY BUILT STEPS
KNOWN AS GHATS, TO ALLOW
EASY ACCESS FOR BATHING.
BUT ANYONE ENTERING THESE
WATERS TAKES A BIG RISK;
FOR HERE, WHERE THE GANGES
CHANGES FROM MOUNTAIN TORRENT
TO MIGHTY WATERWAY, THE
CURRENT IS PARTICULARLY STRONG.
EACH YEAR SEVERAL
PEOPLE ARE WASHED AWAY
BY THE RAGING WATERS.
YET IT'S PRECISELY BECAUSE
OF THE FAST WATERS
THAT THE WORSHIPPERS
FLOCK TO BATHE HERE.
THE RAPID CURRENT IS PROOF
THAT THE RIVER ARRIVES
FRESH AND PURE
FROM THE MOUNTAINS.
WHAT'S MORE, HARIDWAR IS
ONE OF THE FIRST MAJOR TOWNS
DOWNSTREAM OF THE
GANGES' SOURCE
THAT IS EASILY REACHED BY
ROAD, MAKING IT ONE OF
THE MOST POPULAR
PILGRIMAGE SITES IN INDIA.
SINCE IT'S THE RELIGIOUS
OBLIGATION OF EVERY HINDU
TO MAKE AT LEAST ONE VISIT TO
THE GANGES IN THEIR LIFETIME,
COMING TO HARIDWAR IS A
CHANCE FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY
TO FULFILL THEIR DUTY.
THE TOWN IS SET UP TO CATER FOR
THIS MASS RELIGIOUS TOURISM.
FROM THE SHADE OF THEIR WOODEN
SHELTERS, HINDU PRIESTS OFFER
A VARIETY OF SERVICES FROM
ARRANGING ACCOMMODATION
TO CONDUCTING
RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES.
ONE WHICH IS PARTICULARLY
IMPORTANT TO HINDU FAMILIES
IS THE MUNDAN, A HEAD
SHAVING CEREMONY PERFORMED
IN THE FIRST OR
THIRD YEAR OF LIFE.
THE HAIR PRESENT AT BIRTH
REPRESENTS UNWANTED TRAITS
FROM PAST LIVES.
TO ENSURE THE CHILD
DOESN'T CARRY BAD QUALITIES
FROM THE PAST TO THE
PRESENT, THE HEAD IS SHAVED
AND THE OLD HAIR THROWN TO
THE GANGES TO BE PURIFIED.
FAMILIES GO TO EXTRAORDINARY
LENGTHS TO ENSURE THAT THEIR
CHILDREN'S MUNDAN CEREMONY
TAKES PLACE ON THE GANGES.
BEFORE LEAVING HARIDWAR
EVEN THE MOST PIOUS TOURISTS
LIKE TO BUY A
MEMENTO OF THEIR VISIT.
AMONG THE MOST POPULAR
GIFTS ARE SEALED VIALS
OF RIVER WATER
KNOWN AS GANGAJAL.
THE LABEL CLAIMS THAT ADDING
A FEW DROPS OF GANGAJAL
TO YOUR BATH WILL EASE
ALL KINDS OF ILLNESS
AND RID THE
BODY OF SIN.
MOST LOCALS, HOWEVER,
CHOOSE TO BUY A PLASTIC BOTTLE
WHICH THEY FILL UP
FOR THEMSELVES.
WHAT SEEMS LIKE A CHEAP GIFT
IS IN FACT THE MOST PRECIOUS
SOUVENIR ANY VISITOR CAN TAKE
HOME, FOR HINDUS BELIEVE
GANGAJAL HAS
SUPERNATURAL POWERS.
IT'S CLAIMED THAT, NEVER
MIND HOW LONG IT'S KEPT,
GANGES WATER DOES
NOT DETERIORATE
BUT STAYS FRESH EVEN
WHEN EXPOSED TO THE AIR.
IT'S EVEN SAID THAT MOSQUITOS
CAN'T BREED IN GANGAJAL.
THE PILGRIMS BELIEVE THE
RIVER POSSESSES THESE POWERS
BECAUSE IT'S THE EARTHLY
FORM OF THE GODDESS GANGA.
BUT SOME SEEK A MORE
SCIENTIFIC EXPLANATION.
DOWNSTREAM OF THE MAIN
BATHING GHATS, DR. DEWAR LEADS
A TEAM OF SCIENTISTS FROM
THE MALARIA RESEARCH CENTER,
TAKING SAMPLES OF
GANGES WATER FOR ANALYSIS.
THROUGH STUDYING THE PRECISE
COMPOSITION OF THESE SAMPLES,
DOCTOR DEWAR'S TEAM
HAVE REVEALED THAT
GANGAJAL DOES HAVE
UNIQUE QUALITIES.
TRANSLATOR: IT'S TRUE THAT
GANGAJAL HAS A HIGHER LEVEL OF
DISSOLVED OXYGEN COMPARED
TO WATER FROM OTHER AREAS.
THIS IS FIRSTLY DUE TO THE
FAST FLOW OF THE RIVER,
AND SECONDLY THE
TURBULENCE OF THE WATER.
THE WATER IS VERY TURBULENT
AND WE THINK THAT IS WHY
IT HAS HIGHER LEVELS
OF DISSOLVED OXYGEN.
>>THE SCIENTISTS BELIEVE THAT
THE HIGH LEVELS OF OXYGEN
IN GANGAJAL MAKE IT DIFFICULT
FOR BACTERIA TO REPRODUCE.
THIS WOULD EXPLAIN WHY THE
WATER STAYS FRESH FOR SO LONG.
BUT TODAY, DAM AND WATER
DIVERSION PROJECTS
ARE ALTERING THE FLOW
OF THE RIVER CURRENT
AND SO THREATENING THE WATER'S
SELF CLEANSING QUALITIES.
TRANSLATOR: WE KNOW THAT WHEN
DAMS ARE BUILT, THE WATER FLOW
DECREASES AND SO MOSQUITO
BREEDING POTENTIAL INCREASES.
WHEREVER THE WATER
BECOMES STAGNANT,
MOSQUITO BREEDING WILL
AUTOMATICALLY INCREASE.
BECAUSE OF THIS WE ARE
UNDERTAKING STUDIES
IN THE HARIDWAR REGION.
WE IMMERSE MOSQUITO
LARVAE IN THE WATER
TO SEE WHETHER MOSQUITOES
BREED IN IT OR NOT.
WE CHECK THIS IN
OUR LABORATORIES.
WE NOW BELIEVE THAT
MOSQUITO BREEDING
DOES HAPPEN
IN GANGAJAL.
>>DOCTOR DEWAR'S RESEARCH
NOT ONLY EXPLODES THE MYTH
THAT MOSQUITOS CAN'T BREED IN
GANGAJAL, IT'S ALSO THE FIRST
CLUE TO A TERRIBLE CRISIS WHICH
THREATENS THE RIVER TODAY.
AS IT CONTINUES ITS
COURSE THROUGH THE LAND,
THERE'S A GROWING
CONTRADICTION BETWEEN
THE RELIGIOUS VIEW
OF THE RIVER'S PURITY
AND THE ACTUAL PHYSICAL
STATE OF ITS WATERS.
AS NIGHT FALLS ON HARIDWAR,
PILGRIMS CONGREGATE
FOR THE EVENING PRAYER
CEREMONY CALLED GANGA AARTI,
MEANING "RIVER WORSHIP".
THIS IS A POWERFUL CELEBRATION
OF THE LIFE-GIVING QUALITIES
WHICH THE GANGES CARRIES FORTH
FROM HERE TO FERTILIZE THE LAND.
BUT THE BEAUTY OF THE RITUAL
BELIES A TERRIBLE IRONY...
FOR WHILE HARIDWAR IS
WHERE THE GANGES MATURES
INTO A MIGHTY RIVER, IT
ALSO MARKS THE PLACE WHERE
THIS RIVER OF LIFE BEGINS
A BITTER BATTLE TO SURVIVE
THE POLLUTION AND EXCESSES
OF THE MODERN WORLD.
LEAVING THE HIMALAYAS
AND HARIDWAR BEHIND,
THE GANGES ENTERS A
VERY DIFFERENT LANDSCAPE.
THESE LOW LYING REGIONS
KNOWN AS THE GANGETIC PLAINS
ARE SOME OF THE
MOST PRODUCTIVE
AND DENSELY
POPULATED IN ASIA.
THE LAND OWES ITS
FERTILITY TO THE GANGES
AS THE SILT CARRIED
IN THE RIVER'S FLOW
CREATES A RICH SOIL IN
WHICH CROPS FLOURISH.
PRODUCING NEARLY HALF OF ALL
THE COUNTRY'S WHEAT AND RICE,
THESE FLOOD PLAINS ARE
THE BREAD BASKET OF INDIA.
IT'S NO WONDER THAT THE
GANGES IS REVERED AS
THE RIVER OF CREATION
AND ABUNDANCE.
IT'S THE RIVER'S NATURAL
FERTILITY THAT SUPPORTS
THE REGION'S EXCEPTIONALLY
HIGH BIRTH RATES
WHICH ARE SET TO
PROPEL INDIA'S POPULATION
TO AROUND 1.5 BILLION
PEOPLE BY 2030.
BY THEN, INDIA WILL
HAVE OVERTAKEN CHINA
AS THE WORLD'S MOST
POPULOUS COUNTRY.
BUT THE POPULATION GROWTH WHICH
THE GANGES HAS HELPED CREATE
IS NOW THREATENING
ITS VERY EXISTENCE
BECAUSE URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IS POISONING THE RIVER
AND THE PEOPLE
WHO DEPEND UPON IT.
LOCATED IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE GANGETIC PLAINS,
KANPUR IS THE FIRST
MEGA CITY ON THE GANGES.
IT'S HOME TO OVER
FOUR MILLION PEOPLE
AND A BOOMING
LEATHER INDUSTRY.
THE RICH FARMLANDS ALL
AROUND KANPUR HAVE THE
HIGHEST CONCENTRATION
OF LIVESTOCK IN INDIA,
MAKING THIS THE PERFECT PLACE
FOR LEATHER PRODUCTION.
KANPUR'S 350 TANNERIES
SPECIALIZE IN PROCESSING HIDES
INTO HEAVY LEATHER IN
AN INDUSTRY WHICH YIELDS
375 MILLION
DOLLARS A YEAR.
BUT POOR PLANNING MEANS THERE'S
NO EFFECTIVE SYSTEM FOR DEALING
WITH THE MASSIVE AMOUNTS OF
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRODUCED.
FOR THOSE WHO WORK AND LIVE
HERE THE SULFUROUS GASES
POURING FROM THE FACTORIES
ARE A SERIOUS HEALTH RISK.
RATES OF RESPIRATORY
DISEASE IN THIS TOWN
ARE
EXTRAORDINARILY HIGH.
FOR THE RIVER THE EFFECTS
ARE JUST AS DEADLY.
MOST OF THE BYPRODUCTS
FROM THE TANNING INDUSTRY
END UP IN THE GANGES.
THOUGH IT IS MANDATORY THAT
TANNERIES HAVE THEIR OWN
EFFLUENT TREATMENT PLANTS,
AT LEAST HALF DO NOT.
ALL MANNER OF WASTE FROM ANIMAL
CARCASSES TO TOXIC EFFLUENCE
LADEN WITH CARCINOGENIC
CHEMICALS POUR THROUGH
FOUR MAJOR DRAINS
DIRECTLY INTO THE RIVER.
MADHAPUR IS A FISHING VILLAGE
A FEW KILOMETERS DOWNSTREAM
OF KANPUR'S
LEATHER INDUSTRY.
THE RESIDENTS HERE DEPEND
DIRECTLY ON THE RIVER
FOR SUBSISTENCE.
FISHING USED TO PROVIDE THIS
COMMUNITY WITH A GOOD LIVING,
AS KISHAM PALKASHYAB
RECALLS.
TRANSLATOR: WE USED TO WATCH OUR
ELDERS HUNTING FOR FISH HERE
AND THEY HAD TO CARRY THEIR
CATCH IN BUFFALO CARTS.
SUCH BIG FISH, LONG ONES
WEIGHING ABOUT 20 KILOS.
PEOPLE COULDN'T EVEN
LIFT THEM SOMETIMES.
THEN AS WE GREW UP THE AMOUNT
OF FISH GRADUALLY DECREASED.
SOME FISH DON'T EVEN COME
HERE ANYMORE BECAUSE OF
THE BAD WATER THAT
FLOWS FROM KANPUR.
SOMETIMES DEAD FISH
PILE UP ON THE RIVER BANK
AND THE
GANGES STINKS.
>>TO MOST FISH THE POLLUTION
IN THIS WATER PROVES DEADLY.
AMONG THE FEW SPECIES
HARDY ENOUGH TO SURVIVE
IS THE LOCAL
ROHU FISH.
BUT WHEN CAUGHT, THEIR
FLESH IS SO LADEN WITH TOXINS
IT IS PRACTICALLY
INEDIBLE.
TRANSLATOR: SOMETIMES WE
THINK, FINE, WE DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING ELSE TO EAT
SO WE'LL JUST COOK THIS.
BUT SOMETIMES IT TURNS OUT TO BE
BAD AND MAKES THE CHILDREN SICK.
>>THE PEOPLE OF MADHAPUR
KNOW ONLY TOO WELL
HOW POLLUTION IS
POISONING THE RIVER.
BUT THEY CAN'T ESCAPE
ITS DEADLY EFFECTS.
THEY DEPEND ON THESE
WATERS FOR THEIR SURVIVAL.
TRANSLATOR: WHEN WE'RE
OUT FISHING WE ONLY HAVE
THIS WATER TO DRINK.
BUT WHEN YOU RAISE
YOUR HAND IT SMELLS FOUL
AND THERE'S ANIMAL
FAT FLOWING IN THERE.
YOUR HANDS ARE STICKY FROM THE
WATER AND IT'S SO DISGUSTING.
GOD KNOWS WHAT THEY
DISCHARGE INTO THE RIVER.
IT'S NOT FIT
FOR DRINKING.
WHEN YOU RAISE
YOUR HAND LIKE THIS
YOU CAN SEE ANIMAL FAT
FLOATING IN THE WATER.
>>TODAY THE RIVER IS SO
POLLUTED THAT IT'S IMPOSSIBLE
TO MAKE A LIVING
FROM FISHING ANYMORE.
TO SURVIVE, PEOPLE LIKE KISHAM
HAVE TRIED FARMING INSTEAD.
BUT EVEN THE LAND IS
POISONED BY THE RIVER WATER
USED TO IRRIGATE
THE CROPS.
TRANSLATOR: WE WANT TO USE
THE SAND TO GROW CUCUMBERS,
MELONS AND
VEGETABLES.
BUT WHEN YOU PLANT SEEDS IN
THE SOIL THEY DON'T GERMINATE.
EVEN IF THEY
DO GERMINATE,
WHEN THE PLANT
BECOMES SO BIG IT DIES.
THAT'S IT. FOR
US LIFE IS HELL.
>>FOR KISHAM AND HIS FAMILY THE
FUTURE LOOKS INCREASINGLY GRIM
AS KANPUR'S INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT CONTINUES.
COMMERCIAL GROWTH
ATTRACTS TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF NEW RESIDENTS TO
THE CITY EVERY YEAR.
BUT THIS MASS MIGRATION SIMPLY
MAKES THE PROBLEM WORSE.
FOR THE POPULATION OF KANPUR
PRODUCE THEIR OWN WASTE;
AROUND 360 MILLION
LITERS OF SEWAGE PER DAY.
POOR PLANNING MEANS THE
CITY'S TREATMENT PLANTS
STRUGGLE TO COPE AND VAST
AMOUNTS OF RAW SEWAGE
ARE DELIBERATELY
DISCHARGED INTO THE GANGES.
THE RIVER HAS BECOME
A DEADLY THREAT
TO THE PEOPLE
WHO DEPEND ON IT.
NOWHERE IS THE PROBLEM MORE
ACUTE THAN AT THE HOLY GHATS
WHERE THE LOCAL PEOPLE ATTEND
THEIR DAILY BATHING RITUALS.
EVEN HERE THE GANGES IS
CONSIDERED TO BE HOLY
AND WASHING IN ITS
WATERS IS SUPPOSED TO
RID THE BODY OF POLLUTION.
THESE DAYS THE OPPOSITE
OUTCOME IS MORE LIKELY.
AT THE CITY'S HOSPITAL THE
TRUE EXTENT OF KANPUR'S
POLLUTION PROBLEM IS
MADE SHOCKINGLY CLEAR.
SOME 300 PEOPLE A DAY COME HERE
SEEKING TREATMENT FOR
RESPIRATORY DISEASES
CAUSED BY AIR POLLUTION.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE SUFFERING
FROM WATER-BORNE DISEASES
LIKE CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND
HEPATITIS IS EVEN GREATER.
WOMEN AND CHILDREN ARE
ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE.
DOCTOR KIRAN PANDEY IS AN
OBSTETRICIAN WHO HAS FIRST HAND
EXPERIENCE OF THE DEADLY EFFECTS
OF POLLUTION ON PEOPLE'S HEALTH.
TRANSLATOR: IF THE WATER IS
POLLUTED AND PEOPLE ARE
DRINKING IT THEN POLLUTION
IS ENTERING THEIR BODIES.
WORM INFESTATIONS
ARE WATER-BORNE.
DIARRHEA IS SOLELY
A WATER INFECTION.
VIRAL FEVER ALSO
ORIGINATES IN WATER.
>>IT'S NOT ONLY THE ORGANISMS IN
THE WATER WHICH ARE DANGEROUS;
SO, TOO, ARE
THE CHEMICALS.
THOUGH THE LOCAL DRINKING
SUPPLY IS TREATED BEFORE
REACHING THE PUMPS,
TESTS SHOW THAT THIS WATER
STILL HAS HIGH LEVELS OF
CARCINOGENIC CHROMIUM.
THE UNTREATED WATER BEING
USED TO IRRIGATE THE CROPS
IS EXTREMELY
CONTAMINATED,
CONTAINING 64
TIMES MORE ARSENIC
AND 120 TIMES MORE MERCURY
THAN RECOMMENDED LEVELS.
THESE CHEMICALS CANNOT
ONLY CAUSE CANCER,
THEY ALSO DESTROY THE
NUTRIENT CONTENT OF THE FOOD.
ADD WATER, MEANS A BAD
DIET FOR THESE WOMEN.
TRANSLATOR: ALMOST HALF OF ALL
THE PATIENTS WE SEE HAVE ANEMIA.
FOR EXAMPLE, A NORMAL
HEMOGLOBIN LEVEL
WOULD BE
BETWEEN 11 AND 13.
NOW IN INDIA AND IN THIS AREA WE
HAVE PROBLEMS OF MALNUTRITION
SO WE OFTEN GETS PATIENTS
WITH HEMOGLOBIN LEVELS
OF ONE TO THREE MILLIGRAMS
AND BECAUSE OF THIS
THE CHILD'S
GROWTH IS AFFECTED.
IT COULD ALSO LEAD TO PREMATURE
DELIVERY AND UNDERWEIGHT BABIES
AND EVEN
SOMETIMES DEATH.
>>THERE'S NO DOUBT THAT THE
POLLUTED RIVER IS TO BLAME
FOR MUCH OF THE
DEATH AND DISEASE
SUFFERED BY THE
PEOPLE OF KANPUR.
BUT THEY CAN'T AFFORD
TO PROTEST TOO MUCH.
THE WEALTH GENERATED
BY THE TANNERIES
DRIVES THE
LOCAL ECONOMY.
FOR MANY RESIDENTS A DIRTY
GANGES IS A REGRETTABLE
BUT NECESSARY
PRICE TO PAY.
DOWNSTREAM, HOWEVER,
THERE ARE CITIES FOR WHOM
PILGRIMAGE IS CRUCIAL
TO THE LOCAL ECONOMY.
HERE, A POISONED GANGES
PRESENTS A MASSIVE PROBLEM.
THE CITY OF ALLAHABAD SITS
AT ONE OF THE MOST SACRED
RIVER CONFLUENCES
IN INDIA.
THIS IS WHERE THE HOLY GANGES
MEETS THE EARTHLY YAMUNA
AND THE MYTHICAL
SARASVATI RIVER.
HINDU MYTHOLOGY SAYS THAT GODS
AND DEMONS FOUGHT A WAR HERE
OVER THE NECTAR
OF IMMORTALITY,
SPILLING SOME AT THE
RIVERS' CONFLUENCE.
DURING THE KUMBH MELA
FESTIVAL PILGRIMS GATHER
TO VENERATE THE PLACE
WHERE THE NECTAR FELL
IN ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT EVENTS
IN THE RELIGIOUS
CALENDAR.
IN THE COURSE OF THIS 45-DAY
FESTIVAL ALLAHABAD IS
TRANSFORMED AS SOME 70 MILLION
FAITHFUL DESCEND UPON IT
IN WHAT IS PERHAPS THE LARGEST
GATHERING OF HUMANS EVER.
THE MOST IMPORTANT EVENT OF ALL
IS THE ROYAL BATH WHEN PILGRIMS
RUSH TO THE WATERS' EDGE
TO PERFORM A UNIQUE
CLEANSING RITUAL
FOR MOTHER GANGA.
ACCORDING TO LEGEND,
WHEN THE GODDESS AGREED
TO LIBERATE MANKIND
FROM ITS SINS
SHE ASKED WHO WOULD
PURIFY HER AFTERWARDS.
IT WAS DEEMED TO BE THE SADHUS
WHO, DURING THE KUMBH MELA,
WOULD BATHE IN THE WATER,
ABSORBING THE RIVER'S SINS
AND PURIFYING HER
AGAIN AND AGAIN.
BEING FIRST IN THE RIVER
TO CLEANSE THE GODDESS
IS A MUCH SOUGHT
AFTER RIGHT
AND HAS BEEN THE CAUSE
OF STAMPEDES IN THE PAST.
BUT IN 2007 THINGS TOOK A
VERY DIFFERENT TURN AS THE
MOST COMMITTED HOLY MEN
BOYCOTTED THE FESTIVAL.
DISGUSTED BY THE POLLUTION
AND ISLANDS OF RUBBISH
FLOATING IN THE RIVER,
THEY REFUSED TO BATHE
UNTIL THE AUTHORITIES
CLEANED UP THE WATERS.
SOME EVEN THREATENED
MASS SUICIDE.
THESE PROTESTS MARKED A CRITICAL
JUNCTION IN THE RIVER'S STORY.
EVEN THE SADHUS FELT THEY
COULD NO LONGER IGNORE
THE CONTRADICTION BETWEEN
THEIR RELIGIOUS BELIEFS
AND THE PHYSICAL
STATE OF THE WATERS.
SHOCKED BY THE SWELL
OF PUBLIC OPINION,
THE AUTHORITIES OPENED
UP AN UPSTREAM DAM
TO FLUSH POLLUTION AWAY
FROM THE MAIN GHATS.
IT WORKED.
THE SADHUS WERE APPEASED
AND THE FESTIVAL WENT AHEAD.
BUT IN THE MINDS OF THE PUBLIC A
NEW TRUTH HAD BEEN ESTABLISHED
- THAT THE GANGES, THOUGH
HOLY, IS NOW LESS THAN PURE.
IT'S BECOMING CLEAR THAT DRASTIC
LONG TERM ACTION IS NEEDED TO
PREVENT THIS RIVER OF LIFE FROM
BECOMING THE RIVER OF DEATH.
125 KILOMETERS
DOWNSTREAM FROM ALLAHABAD,
THE GANGES REACHES
THE CITY OF VARANASI.
AT THIS HOLIEST OF SITES
THE RIVER IS FACING
ITS MOST DIRE CRISIS.
VARANASI IS SAID TO BE
THE SPIRITUAL HOME OF
ALL 330 MILLION HINDU
GODS AND GODDESSES.
IT'S ALSO THE ONLY PLACE ON
ITS ENTIRE COURSE WHERE THE
RIVER RUNS NORTHWARD IN
THE DIRECTION OF ITS SOURCE.
LEGEND HAS IT THAT THE GANGES
FELL SO IN LOVE WITH VARANASI
SHE NEARLY GAVE UP ON
HER SEAWARD JOURNEY
TO STAY IN THE CITY.
THIS IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
PILGRIMAGE SITE IN INDIA.
HINDUS BELIEVE THAT THOSE
WHO ARE CREMATED AND HAVE
THEIR ASHES THROWN TO
THE GANGES AT VARANASI
WILL RECEIVE
ETERNAL SALVATION.
FOR THIS REASON SICK PEOPLE MAKE
A DESPERATE PILGRIMAGE FROM
ALL AROUND THE COUNTRY TO SPEND
THEIR LAST DAYS IN THIS CITY.
LIVING IN THE MOST PRIMITIVE
CONDITIONS, THESE WOMEN HAVE
CHOSEN TO LEAVE THEIR FAMILIES
BEHIND AND FACE DEATH ALONE.
SURENDRA PASAYAD ATTENDS TO THE
ILL AND DYING ON THE RIVERBANKS.
TRANSLATOR: THE OLD PEOPLE
WHO COME TO VARANASI THINK
"IF I DETACH MYSELF FROM
MY FAMILY I WILL FIND GOD".
WHEN YOU SACRIFICE ONE
THING YOU RECEIVE ANOTHER
SO PEOPLE COME
HERE TO FIND GOD.
>>IN RETURN FOR A SMALL PAYMENT
SURENDRA MAKES SURE THAT
THESE WOMEN RECEIVE FOOD
AND MEDICINES FOR THEIR PAINS.
BUT TO HIM IT'S ABOUT
MORE THAN MONEY.
TRANSLATOR: HELPING THE OLD
PEOPLE GIVES ME MORE SPIRITUAL
FULFILLMENT THAN THE
ACT OF JUST PRAYING.
I GET A GREATER REWARD
FROM SERVING THE OLD PEOPLE
THAN FROM
WORSHIP ALONE.
THAT'S WHY I
DO THIS WORK.
>>NOT ONLY DOES SURENDRA
CARE FOR THE SICK,
HE LOOKS AFTER
THE DEAD, TOO.
WHEN THESE WOMEN DIE,
SURENDRA WILL FULFILL THEIR
FINAL WISH BY MAKING SURE
THAT THEIR BODIES ARE
RITUALLY BURNED
ON THE RIVERBANK.
THE MAIN CREMATION
BUSINESS IS BASED HERE
AT THE
MANIKARNIKA GHAT,
THE HOLIEST OF ALL PLACES
IN THIS CITY OF HOLIES.
WORKING IN THIS DEATH FACTORY
IS A DIRTY AND DANGEROUS JOB.
THOSE WHO KEEP THE FIRES BURNING
DAY AND NIGHT BELONG TO THE
SOCIAL GROUP, OR CASTE,
KNOWN AS THE "UNTOUCHABLES".
IN TRADITIONAL INDIAN SOCIETY,
UNTOUCHABLES ARE RECOGNIZED
AS HAVING THE LOWEST
STATUS OF ALL THE CASTES.
BUT AT MANIKARNIKA THEY
COMMAND HUGE RESPECT.
FOR RICH OR POOR,
HIGH OR LOW CASTE,
THE DECEASED AND THEIR FAMILIES
DEPEND ON THESE WORKERS
TO CARRY OUT A
PROPER HINDU FUNERAL.
PACKAGE DEALS ARE AVAILABLE
EVEN FOR THE DEAD.
ALL THE WOOD, INCENSE, AND
MANPOWER NEEDED FOR A FULL
CREMATION CAN BE BOUGHT
FOR SOME 950 RUPEES.
THAT'S ABOUT
20 DOLLARS.
ONCE THE PRICE IS AGREED, THE
DEATH SERVANTS GO TO WORK.
FIREWOOD IS
WEIGHED FOR THE PYRE
ONTO WHICH THE
BODY WILL BE PLACED.
THE CORPSE IS LIT FROM AN
ETERNAL FLAME WHICH IS
SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN
BURNING SINCE THE DAWN OF TIME.
MEANWHILE THE CHIEF MOURNER,
USUALLY THE ELDEST SON,
HAS HIS HEAD SHAVED AS
A SYMBOL OF HIS GRIEF.
AFTER THE RITUAL PREPARATION,
THE MOURNER TAKES THE TWIGS
OF HOLY KUSA GRASS
FROM THE ETERNAL FIRE
TO SET THE
PYRE ALIGHT.
THE CORPSE BURNS AND THE FIRE
CONVEYS THE DECEASED TO HEAVEN.
TO THE WIDER WORLD, THE PUBLIC
NATURE OF THIS CEREMONY
MAY SEEM MACABRE.
BUT FOR HINDUS IT IS ONLY RIGHT
THAT THIS CELEBRATORY RITUAL
SHOULD HAPPEN
IN THE OPEN.
FEW TEARS ARE SHED AS THE
MOURNERS WATCH THE SOULS
OF THEIR DEAD ASCENDING
TO THE AFTERLIFE.
TRANSLATOR: VARANASI
IS NOT A SAD PLACE.
YOU CAN ATTAIN ALL
FORMS OF HAPPINESS HERE.
THERE'S NO GREATER
PLEASURE THAN SALVATION,
SO VARANASI
ISN'T A SAD PLACE.
>>AFTER THE CREMATION THE
ASHES ARE THROWN INTO THE RIVER
AND THE MOURNERS WALK
AWAY WITHOUT LOOKING BACK.
THE FUNERAL WORKERS IN THE
MEANTIME RIFLE THROUGH THE
CHARCOAL IN SEARCH OF GOLD TEETH
AND OTHER PRECIOUS REMNANTS.
BUT IT'S NOT ONLY PEOPLE'S ASHES
THAT ARE THROWN TO THE RIVER.
PREGNANT WOMEN AND DEAD BABIES
ARE CONSIDERED DEVOID OF SIN.
THEY DON'T NEED TO BE
CLEANSED BY CREMATION
AND THEIR BODIES ARE FLOATED
DIRECTLY ON THE WATER.
AT VARANASI, CORPSES
WRAPPED IN ORNATE SHROUDS
ARE OFTEN SEEN
FLOATING ALONG.
THE BEACH OPPOSITE
THE CITY IS ALSO LITTERED
WITH HUMAN REMAINS.
YET STILL, EVERY MORNING
HINDUS GATHER TO BATHE,
DRIVEN BY AN UNSHAKABLE
BELIEF IN THE RIVER'S PURITY.
ONE OF THEM IS
DOCTOR BADRA MISHRA.
DOCTOR MISHRA WAS ONLY 14 WHEN
HE BECAME THE SEVENTH PRIEST
IN HIS FAMILY, A POSITION PASSED
DOWN FROM FATHER TO SON.
HE'S ALSO A PROFESSOR OF
HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING AND IS
FULLY AWARE OF THE POLLUTION
WHICH PLAGUES THE RIVER.
YET FOR HIM, BATHING IN THESE
WATERS IS NOT A MATTER OF CHOICE
BUT A MATTER OF FAITH.
TRANSLATOR: THE RELIGIOUS TEXTS
SAY THAT VISITING THE GODDESS -
TOUCHING, WASHING, DRINKING
HER - CLEANSES OUR SINS.
I WILL NOT BREAK FROM TRADITION
BUT I ALSO JUST CAN'T BELIEVE
THAT THERE IS NO POLLUTION
ENTERING THE GANGES.
THERE CERTAINLY IS.
SO IN MY CASE THERE'S A
RATIONALLY TRAINED MIND
AS WELL AS A
COMMITTED HEART.
>>DOCTOR MISHRA BELIEVES
IT IS THE AUTHORITIES,
NOT THE PILGRIMS,
WHO ARE TO BLAME
FOR MOST OF THE
POLLUTION ON THE GANGES.
TRANSLATOR: SAYING THAT
IT'S ONLY THE PILGRIMS
THAT ARE MAKING THE
RIVER IMPURE AND DIRTY,
THIS BELIEF SHOULD
COME TO AN END.
THE GANGES IS BEING HARMED
BY THOSE PEOPLE WHO ARE
OVERSEEING THE FUNCTIONING OF
THE CITIES AND THE FACTORIES
AND THOSE WHO ARE
DUMPING THE EFFLUENCE
OF THE MANY FACTORIES
INTO THE RIVER...
WHICH WE REFER TO AS POINT
SOURCES OF POLLUTION.
95% OF THE POLLUTION IS CAUSED
BY POINT SOURCES OF POLLUTION.
>>FRUSTRATED BY THE AUTHORITIES'
INDIFFERENCE, DOCTOR MISHRA
BEGAN HIS OWN GANGES CLEAN
UP CAMPAIGN AND ESTABLISHED
A RESEARCH LABORATORY TO
MONITOR POLLUTION LEVELS.
TODAY, KRUPEM DUBEI WORKS AT
THE LAB TESTING SAMPLES OF
RIVER WATER FOR A BACTERIUM
CALLED FECAL COLIFORM,
WHICH IS PRESENT
IN HUMAN SEWAGE.
IF IT'S INGESTED, THIS ORGANISM
CAN CAUSE DEADLY ILLNESSES
SUCH AS TYPHOID
AND HEPATITIS.
THE AMOUNT OF FECAL COLIFORM
PRESENT IN THE WATER
IS A PRIME INDICATOR OF THE
HEALTH HAZARD WHICH IT POSES.
THE TEST RESULTS AT
VARANASI ARE SHOCKING.
TRANSLATOR: FOR
DRINKING WATER,
THE FECAL COLIFORM CONTENT
SHOULD BE 500 OR LESS.
THAT'S THE
PERMISSIBLE LIMIT.
OUR SAMPLES ARE TAKEN FIVE
METERS FROM THE RIVERBANK
BECAUSE THAT'S THE FURTHEST
POINT FROM THE BANK
THAT PEOPLE ARE
ABLE TO BATHE.
THEY ALSO DRINK THE WATER FROM
THERE AND THE FECAL COLIFORM
COUNT IS FOUND TO BE
BETWEEN 40,000 TO 80,000.
THE BIGGEST REASON
FOR THIS IS SEWAGE.
>>TODAY, OVER A MILLION
LITERS OF SEWAGE
IS DUMPED INTO THE
GANGES EVERY SECOND.
AT VARANASI THE BIGGEST
PROBLEM IS POOR INFRASTRUCTURE.
WITH A POPULATION OF
MORE THAN THREE MILLION
THIS CITY SUFFERS
FREQUENT POWER SHORTAGES.
WITHOUT ELECTRICITY, THE PUMPS
WHICH OPERATE THE SEWAGE PLANTS
SHUT DOWN AND THE BACK FLOW
OF WASTE ENDS UP IN THE GANGES.
THE SCALE OF VARANASI'S
SEWAGE PROBLEM MEANS THAT
ORDINARY PEOPLE ARE
POWERLESS TO CHANGE IT.
BUT DRIVEN BY AN INNATE
DESIRE TO HELP THE GANGES,
THEY DO WHAT THEY CAN.
EVERY MORNING THESE MEN
GATHER AT THE RIVERBANK
TO CLEAR THE POLLUTION
WITH THEIR BARE HANDS.
TRANSLATOR: GARLANDS,
FLOWERS, PLASTIC, CLOTHES -
WE PICK THEM ALL UP AND
PUT THEM IN THE BOAT.
WE TAKE THIS RUBBISH TO
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE RIVER
WHERE THE DOGS AND
CROWS EAT IT ALL UP.
>>THEY ALSO PICK UP HUMAN
CORPSES AND CARCASSES
OF SACRED COWS OFTEN
FOUND FLOATING IN THE WATERS.
BUT THEIR EFFORTS ARE
JUST A DROP IN THE OCEAN.
TRANSLATOR: OF COURSE WE
FEEL THERE SHOULDN'T BE
ANY POLLUTION.
WE TRY AND CLEAN UP BUT
THE POLLUTION CONTINUES.
HOW MUCH CAN
BE CLEANED?
THERE ARE JUST A
FEW OF US CLEANING
BUT GOD KNOWS HOW
MANY ARE POLLUTING.
>>VARANASI MARKS A CRUCIAL
POINT IN THE GANGES' STORY.
IT'S HERE THAT THE SPIRITUAL
CYCLE OF LIFE AND DEATH
ASSOCIATED WITH THE
RIVER REACHES ITS CLIMAX.
IT'S ALSO WHERE HARD SCIENCE IS
MOST AT ODDS WITH HINDU BELIEF.
THE EVIDENCE PROVES THAT
THE GANGES AT VARANASI
IS ANYTHING BUT PURE.
MANY CLAIM THAT
THE PILGRIMS' FAITH
MAKES THEM BLIND
TO THE PROBLEMS.
OTHERS BELIEVE THAT EVEN IF
PEOPLE KNEW ABOUT THE POLLUTION
THEY WOULD STILL FEEL
COMPELLED TO BATHE.
TRANSLATOR: FOR THEM, THE
GANGES IS THE MEDIUM OF LIFE.
JUST LIKE A FISH CANNOT
BE SEPARATED FROM WATER,
THEY CANNOT BE SEPARATED
FROM THE GANGES.
>>WHAT'S MORE, DOCTOR
MISHRA IS CONVINCED THAT
THE PEOPLE BEST PLACED
TO PURIFY THE GANGES
ARE THE VERY PEOPLE
WHO BELIEVE IN HER PURITY.
TRANSLATOR: IF I SIT WITH
THE MASSES AND SAY THAT
THE GANGES HAS BECOME
DIRTY, IS POLLUTED,
WITHIN A MINUTE OR TWO
SOMEONE WILL GET UP AND SAY,
"YOUR HOLINESS,
PLEASE DON'T SAY THAT.
IT'S UNBEARABLE.
WHAT ARE YOU SAYING?
CAN THE MOTHER EVER
BE DIRTY OR POLLUTED?"
BUT WHEN YOU SHOW THEM
WHAT'S HAPPENING THEY SAY,
"NO, THE CITY'S SEWAGE
AND DRAINS SHOULD NOT BE
EMPTIED INTO THE RIVER.
THIS MUST STOP".
IF THIS LOVE AND RESPECT FOR
THE RIVER CAN BE HARNESSED
IT CAN BECOME
A GREAT POWER
WHICH CAN HELP US
IN SO MANY WAYS.
>>IF THE POWER OF LOVE
CAN TRULY SAVE THIS RIVER
THEN THERE IS HOPE YET.
FOR NO RIVER ON EARTH
IS AS LOVED BY ITS PEOPLE
AS THE GANGES.
PERHAPS 4,000 YEARS OF FAITH
IN THE PURITY OF THESE WATERS
WILL UNDO THE LAST
50 YEARS OF NEGLECT.
BUT POLLUTION IS JUST ONE OF
THE PROBLEMS TO BE FACED.
AS THE GLACIER WHICH FEEDS
THE RIVER CONTINUES TO RECEDE
THERE IS A REAL
DANGER THAT THE
SOURCE OF THE
GANGES WILL DISAPPEAR.
YET INDIA NEEDS THE RIVER
TODAY MORE THAN EVER.
AS THE POPULATION BOOM
CONTINUES, THE AMOUNT OF WATER
AVAILABLE TO EACH PERSON
IS RAPIDLY DECREASING.
IT'S ESTIMATED THAT BY 2020
INDIA'S DEMAND FOR WATER
WILL EXCEED ALL
SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
DRASTIC CHANGE IS
NEEDED TO SAVE THE RIVER
AND PROTECT THE
FUTURE OF HER PEOPLE.
HOW THAT CAN BE DONE IS THE
CHALLENGE FACING INDIA TODAY.